Outside a hospital in
Guayaquil, Ecuador,
a family seals the
coffin of their father
with plastic wrap.
Many people in Guayaquil
blame the government
for failing to slow the
spread of coronavirus,
and to deal with the thousands
of bodies that have piled up
in the aftermath.
Guayaquil has suffered
arguably the worst
Covid death toll
in Latin America.
The thing is, Ecuador
had acted earlier
than its neighbors to
close borders and order
strict quarantine.
So what went wrong?
From the start,
the one-two punch
of rapid contagion and
the ensuing death toll
caught local and
national officials off guard.
On Feb. 27,
doctors in Guayaquil
diagnosed the country’s
first Covid-19 patient,
Bella Lamilla, a 71-year-old
retired teacher, otherwise
known as “Patient Zero.”
Dr. Esteban Ortiz-Prado
is a medical investigator
helping to advise the
government on the pandemic.
It took 13 days to diagnose
Lamilla with coronavirus.
And in that time, she infected
many other people, including
much of her family,
pictured here in 2019.
In all, three
family members died,
including Bella herself.
After she arrived
in Ecuador, Lamilla
stayed in the home of
her niece, Cassandra,
in the town of Babahoyo.
Bella Lamilla was certainly
not the only case.
There were at least six
other flights from Madrid
to Guayaquil between
the time she arrived
and when she was diagnosed.
Other travelers later tested
positive for Covid-19.
Those lost weeks led to an
out-of-control epidemic.
Two and a half weeks after
Bella Lamilla’s diagnosis,
the country was on lockdown.
Two weeks after
that, Guayaquil
was in the throes of the
most aggressive outbreak
in Latin America.
“It is true that at the very
beginning, it was a disaster.
We are learning by mistake,
by errors that we made.”
This is
Dr. Juan Carlos Zevallos.
He was installed as
Ecuador’s health minister
in late March, after the
former minister resigned.
He admits the
government should have
tested and tracked patients.
But he also blames
residents for not
following stay-at-home orders
after Bella’s diagnosis.
“Ecuador, as I said,
was prepared.
I mean, did all the measures
in place and very early.
Unfortunately, the
people didn’t hear us.
And they did not obey
those restrictions.”
Like a lot of cities
in Latin America,
a large segment of
Guayaquil’s population
lives day to day,
working informal jobs.
So to stay home
means not eating.
It was a
perfect storm of factors
that left
Guayaquil’s hospitals
and morgues overwhelmed.
Now, the government of
Ecuador has another dilemma:
Just how to bury the
thousands of bodies
that have piled up in the
weeks after Lamilla’s death?
Ecuador's official Covid
death toll is several hundred.
But forensic police have
been working around the clock
to collect and account
for thousands more dead.
And construction
is now underway
for various large
burial sites around the city.
Container trucks like
this one transport
corpses to one new site on
the outskirts of Guayaquil,
in the neighborhood
of Pascuales.
Local residents fearful of
contamination are outraged.
Officials in charge
of handling the dead
have promised that
each body will have
a separate resting place.
We attempted to film drone
footage of the new burial site.
But Ecuadorean soldiers
ordered our team
to bring the drone down,
and temporarily confiscated
our footage.
A human rights worker
documented the incident.
Since the first
coronavirus diagnosis,
distrust of the government’s
handling of this crisis
appears to have spread as
fast as the contagion itself.